The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shrubs for Kansas Landscapes, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Shrubs for Kansas Landscapes

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: May 26, 2020 [EBook #62234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHRUBS FOR KANSAS LANDSCAPES ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                                 SHRUBS
                         for Kansas Landscapes


  Cooperative Extension Service • Kansas State University • Manhattan


This publication is one of a series of circulars to help you with your
landscape planning. Use this bulletin when selecting shrubs for
particular locations in your yard. Consider each plant for its intended
use, site location, and exposure. Use the plant descriptions listed in
the tables while visiting nurseries. This will help you to realize the
size and performance you may expect from the plants.

All shrubs that will grow in the various sections of Kansas are not
listed. Most of the shrubs mentioned were selected from the various
Kansas retail nursery catalogs. A few shrub varieties are not listed in
these retail catalogs, but your nurseryman can get them from wholesale
nurseries supplying Kansas firms. The varieties listed are the more
common shrubs used for landscaping purposes and will provide you with a
wide assortment of plant material to solve any landscaping need.

                            GARY L. McDANIEL
                          Extension Specialist
               Landscaping and Environmental Horticulture

  The author wishes to thank Larry D. Leuthold for helpful comments
  during the preparation of this bulletin and Joe D. Roller for
  designing the illustrations used in this publication.

    [Illustration: Checklist]

  USES FOR WHICH WE WANT PLANT MATERIAL
    1. Accent
    2. Border
    3. Soften Building Appearance
    4. Screen poor views
    5. Privacy
    6. Hold a Soil Bank
    7. ground cover

Shrubs are used in landscaping to provide low foliage and flowers that
will compliment the house and trees in your yard. Each shrub used in
your yard should fulfill a specific purpose for the overall design.

Select shrubs that will provide _accent_ for your entryway or border
focal point, _soften_ corners and harsh lines, or provide a low
_transition_ from one point to another. Shrubs are also useful for
dividing spaces by _separating_ use areas in the yard. Shrubs are used
with trees to _screen_ unpleasant views or protect our yards from strong
winds.




                        ^Shrubs as Accent Plants


    [Illustration: _Accent end of walk if sidewalk approaches from
    driveway._]

Shrubs that create a definite accent must be used with more care in your
landscape than shrubs that soften lines. Two primary areas in your
landscape should be accented. The most important of these is the front
entryway to your home.

If the sidewalk to your front door approaches from the driveway along
the front of the house, the accent area is at the end of the walk. This
will provide a “visual” as well as a “physical” barrier that will point
out the front door. Sidewalks that lead directly from the street to the
door present a different situation. Accent may be created on either side
of the front door, but never make the plantings completely symmetrical
on each side. Create a strong accent to one side and a less dominant
accent on the other side of the entryway. Never use accent plants on the
corners of your house.

Accents may be created by (1) _Height_—taller plants catch the eye
first; (2) _Color_—brightly colored foliage always attracts attention;
(3) _Texture_—coarse leaf or stem textures provide strong contrasts; and
(4) _Form_—pyramidal shrubs or clipping shrubs into unnatural shapes
will create accent.

    [Illustration: _Shrubbery should create a stronger accent on one
    side of the entryway._]

    [Illustration: _A single small upright Juniper can be used to accent
    an entry._]

    [Illustration: Another accent area for your landscape may be located
    in your shrub border. This area could be to the rear of your
    property, where it can be viewed from the patio or living room
    window. Never place accent plants randomly through the shrub border.
    This causes each accent plant to “fight” for dominance.]


                             ACCENT PLANTS

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height).
    Elder, Golden
    Fringe Tree, Red
    Privit, Golden
    Wayfaring Tree
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height).
    Burning Bush, Winged
    Dogwood, Coral
    Dogwood, Redosier
    Dogwood, Silky
    Dogwood, Yellowtwig
    Ninebark, Common
    Ninebark, Goldleaf
    Sand Cherry, Purpleleaf
    Viburnum, Arrowwood
    Viburnum, Doublefile
    Weigela
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height).
    Barberry, Redleaf
    Burning Bush, Dwarf Winged
    Weigela, Dwarf
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height).
    Barberry, Crimson Pygmy
    Ninebark, Dwarf
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height).
    Holly
    Magnolia, Southern
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height).
    Mahonia, Oregon Grape
    Viburnum, Leatherleaf
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height).
    Euonymus, Emerald ’n’ Gold
    Holly
    Nandina
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height).
    Azalea
    Euonymus, Emerald Gaiety
    Holly, Dwarf
    Mahonia, Compact Oregon Grape
    Rhododendron




                    ^Shrubs that Soften the Building


Shrubs that will soften the lines of the house or buildings have a
_round_, _oval_, or _irregular_ shape. These shrubs break the strong
vertical lines at the corners of the house, rather than call attention
to them.

    [Illustration: _Shrubs will soften the lines at the corners of your
    house. Where windows are close to the corner, select dwarf shrubs
    that will not grow higher than the sill._]

Never select shrubs that create an accent for corner plantings. Consider
a brightly colored foliage on shrubs during the summer or fall as an
accent. Do not plant upright-growing pyramidal evergreens, such as
Junipers, for planting at the corners of your home. The shape of these
plants creates an accent which will detract from the foundation
planting. Instead of softening the harsh vertical lines at the corners
of the house, pyramidal-shaped shrubs call attention to them.

    [Illustration: _Use small ornamental trees to add a softer
    appearance to wall corners. Place these trees far enough away from
    the house that the branches will not rub against it when the tree is
    fully grown. Place low facer plants in front of the taller shrubs to
    give the corner planting more depth._]

    [Illustration: _Floor length windows at the corners require low
    groundcovers or very dwarf shrubs below them. A small ornamental
    tree will assist in softening the corner, if you want some shade on
    the window. Extending the groundcover around the tree will make the
    mowing much easier._]


                          TRANSITION PLANTINGS

Plants used as a transition are simply those shrubs or ground covers
that pull together the plantings at the corners or accented entryways.
These shrubs are used to soften the lines of the house, where the walls
meet the ground.

Use shrubs that will not call attention to themselves by having bright
foliage or coarse leaf texture. These shrubs also help to hide any
exposed foundation walls along the house. Transition shrubs should be
low-growing or dwarf in size. If the siding of your house extends to the
ground without leaving the foundation walls exposed, a groundcover may
be all that is required to add depth to the foundation planting.

    [Illustration: _Shrubs help hide unsightly construction_]

    [Illustration: ... as planted]

    [Illustration: _... and soften harsh house lines._]

    [Illustration: ... as planted]


                  CONTINUOUS BLOOM FOR YOUR LANDSCAPE

Whether you are selecting shrubs for the foundation plantings around the
house or for a shrub border in your yard, choose shrubs that will bloom
at different seasons. Most of the flowering shrubs that are available
bloom during the spring. Once some shrubs have finished blooming, they
have no other ornamental features. The interest in your landscape will
be lost, unless you have selected some summer-blooming shrubs. Attempt
to design your landscape so you can have continuous shrub bloom from
early spring through late summer.


                          SHRUB ORDER OF BLOOM


                              EARLY SPRING

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Medium)
    Redbud Chinese
    Willow, Pussy
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Tall)
    Cherry, Nanking
    Crabapple, Sargent
    Forsythia
    Magnolia, Star
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Small)
    Honeysuckle, Winter (Fragrant)
    Quince, Flowering
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Dwarf)
    Quince, Japanese Flowering
    Forsythia, Bronx
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS
    Magnolia, Southern


                              LATE SPRING

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Tall)
    Cranberrybush
    Dogwood, Gray
    Honeysuckle, Tatarian
    Lilac
    Maple, Amur
    Olive, Autumn
    Pearlbush
    Pea Shrub
    Plum, Flowering
    Snowball
    Viburnum
    Wayfaring Tree
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Medium)
    Barberry
    Bayberry, Northern
    Beautybush
    Cotoneaster, Large Flowering
    Deutzia, Lemoine
    Dogwood
    Honeysuckle, Morrow
    Honeysuckle, Zabel
    Jetbead, Black
    Privit
    Sand Cherry, Purpleleaf
    Scotch Broom
    Spirea, Bridalwreath
    Spirea, Vanhoutte
    Viburnum
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Small)
    Almond, Flowering
    Barberry, Japanese
    Cotoneaster, Spreading
    Kerria
    Lilac, Dwarf Korean
    Spirea, Garland
    Spirea, Thunberg
    Weigela
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Dwarf)
    Barberry, Crimson Pygmy
    Cotoneaster, Cranberry
    Deutzia
    Pea Shrub, Pygmy
    Quince, Japanese Flowering
    Spirea, Snowmound
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS
    Barberry, Wintergreen
    Mahonia, Oregon Grape
    Pyracantha
    Viburnum, Leatherleaf


                              EARLY SUMMER

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Tall)
    Elder, Golden
    Fringe Tree, Red
    Mockorange, Big Scentless
    Privit
    Smoke Tree (Purple Fringe)
    Tamarisk
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Medium)
    Deutzia
    Lilac, Late
    Lilac, Persian
    Mockorange
    Viburnum
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Small)
    Beautyberry, Japanese
    Hydrangea, Annabelle
    Mockorange
    Spirea, Anthony Waterer
    Spirea, Froebel
    Spirea, Redflowering Japanese
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS
    Euonymus (Patens)


                              LATE SUMMER

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Tall)
    Crapemyrtle
    Rose-of-Sharon
    Tamarisk
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Medium)
    Butterfly Bush
    Tamarisk, ‘Summer Glow’
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Small)
    Abelia, Glossy
    Hydrangea, A. G.
    Mockorange
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Dwarf)
    Chenault Coralberry
    Cinqefoil
    Hypericum
    Spirea, Anthony Waterer

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


                           SHRUB BLOOM COLOR


                        DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Tall)

  WHITE
    Cranberrybush
    Crapemyrtle
    Dogwood, Gray
    Elder, Golden
    Honeysuckle, White Tatarian
    Lilac, Common
    Lilac, Peking
    Pearlbush
    Privit
    Redbud, Chinese
    Rose-of-Sharon
    Snowball
    Viburnum
  PINK
    Crapemyrtle
    Fringe Tree, Red
    Honeysuckle, Red Tatarian
    Honeysuckle, Rosy Tatarian
    Plum, Flowering
    Rose-of-Sharon
    Smoke Tree (Purple Fringe)
    Tamarisk
    Willow, Pussy
  YELLOW
    Barberry, Mentor
    Maple, Amur
    Olive, Autumn
    Pea Shrub
  PURPLE-LILAC
    Lilac, Chinese
    Lilac, Common
    Rose-of-Sharon


                       DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Medium)

  WHITE
    Butterflybush
    Crabapple, Sargent
    Deutzia, Lemoine
    Deutzia, Pride of Rochester
    Dogwood
    Honeysuckle, Morrow
    Jetbead, Black
    Magnolia, Star
    Mockorange
    Privit
    Sand Cherry, Purpleleaf
    Scotch Broom
    Spirea, Bridalwreath
    Spirea, Vanhoutte
    Viburnum
  PINK
    Bayberry, Northern
    Beautybush
    Butterfly Bush
    Cherry, Nanking
    Cotoneaster, Large Flowering
    Crabapple, Sargent
    Deutzia, Pride of Rochester
    Honeysuckle, Zabel
    Lilac, Late
    Lilac, Persian
    Magnolia, Pink Star
    Scotch Broom
    Tamarix, ‘Summer Glow’
    Weigela
  YELLOW
    Barberry
    Forsythia
    Scotch Broom


                        DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Small)

  WHITE
    Almond, Flowering
    Honeysuckle, Winter (Fragrant)
    Hydrangea, A. G.
    Mockorange
    Quince, Japanese Flowering
    Spirea, Garland
    Spirea, Thunberg
    Viburnum
  PINK
    Abelia, Glossy
    Almond, Flowering
    Beautyberry, Japanese
    Cotoneaster, Spreading
    Hydrangea
    Quince, Japanese Flowering
    Weigela
  YELLOW
    Barberry, Japanese
    Kerria
  PURPLE
    Hydrangea (blue)
    Lilac, Dwarf Korean


                        DECIDUOUS SHRUBS (Dwarf)

  WHITE
    Deutzia, Slender
    Hydrangea, Annabelle
    Mockorange, Dwarf
    Spirea, Snowmound
  PINK
    Chenault Coralberry
    Cotoneaster, Cranberry
    Deutzia, Rosepanicle
    Quince, Japanese Flowering (red)
    Spirea, Froebel (crimson)
    Spirea, Anthony Waterer
    Spirea, Redflowering, Japanese
  YELLOW
    Barberry, Crimson Pygmy
    Cinquefoil
    Forsythia, Bronx
    Hypericum
    Pea Shrub, Pygmy
  ORANGE
    Quince, Japanese Flowering


                       BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS

  WHITE
    Azalea
    Euonymus (Patens)
    Magnolia, Southern
    Pyracantha
    Rhododendron
    Viburnum, Leatherleaf
  LILAC
    Rhododendron
  PINK
    Azalea
    Rhododendron
  YELLOW
    Azalea
    Barberry, Wintergreen
    Mahonia, Oregon Grape




                      ^Shrubs for Shady Locations


Most of the plants that are adapted for western Kansas will grow on the
north side if they are planted 3 to 4 feet from the building and out
from the roof overhang. In eastern Kansas it is necessary to consider
shade tolerance when planting on the north side of the house.

Most shrubs will bloom more profusely and produce more fruit when
planted in the sun, even though they may survive quite well in deep
shade. Often shrubs will grow better in shade simply because they are
protected from the southwest winds. If you don’t want to plant dwarf
shrubs 3 to 4 feet out from the foundation of the house, then plant only
shade tolerant shrubs.

What is often thought of as a shade problem is often the result of
competition from the roots of adjoining trees. Apply plant food and
water and thin the tree branches to correct this problem.

The shrubs listed for shady locations may be expected to perform
adequately on the north side of the house or behind fences in deep
shade. Many of these same shrubs will do equally well in strong sunlight
or shade.

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height).
    Mockorange, Big Scentless
    Privit, Amur River North
    Privit, California
    Privit, Common
    Viburnum, Cranberrybush
    Viburnum, Snowball
    Wahoo
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height).
    Barberry, Mentor
    Barberry, Truehedge
    Dogwood, Coral
    Dogwood, Redozier
    Dogwood, Silky
    Dogwood, Yellowtwig
    Holly, Winterberry
    Jetbead, Black
    Mockorange, Enchantment
    Mockorange, Innocence
    Mockorange, Minnesota Snowflake
    Mockorange, Sweet
    Ninebark
    Spirea, Vanhoutte
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height).
    Abelia, Glossy
    Barberry, Japanese (green)
    Barberry, Kobold
    Honeysuckle, Winter (Fragrant)
    Hydrangea, A. G.
    Hydrangea, Nikko Blue
    Indiancurrent Coralberry
    Kerria, Japanese
    Mockorange, Alberta and Glacier
    Mockorange, Belle Etoile
    Mockorange, Bouquet Blanc
    Snowberry
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height).
    Chenault Coralberry
    Hydrangea, Annabelle
    Mockorange, Dwarf Minnesota Snowflake
    Mockorange, Silver Showers
    Mockorange, Dwarf Sweet
    Ninebark, Dwarf
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height).
    Holly, American
    Holly, Yaupon
    Magnolia, Southern
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height).
    Euonymus, Large Leaf
    Euonymus, Manhattan
    Holly, Burford
    Mahonia, Oregon Grape
    Viburnum, Leatherleaf
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height).
    Euonymus, Dupont
    Euonymus, Jewel
    Euonymus, Medium Leaf
    Euonymus, Sarcoxie
    Holly, Dwarf Japanese
    Holly, Heller’s
    Holly, Hetz
    Nandina
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height).
    Azalea, Kurume
    Azalea, Mollis Hybrid
    Boxwood, Edging
    Boxwood, Wintergreen
    Euonymus, Emerald Cushion
    Euonymus, Emerald Gaiety
    Euonymus, Small Leaf
    Euonymus, Vinca Leaf
    Holly, Dwarf Burford
    Holly, Dwarf Chinese
    Mahonia, Compact Oregon Grape
    Rhododendron


              SHRUBS HAVING FRUIT THAT WILL ATTRACT BIRDS

  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height).
    Cotoneaster, Peking
    Cranberrybush, American
    Dogwood, Gray
    Elder, Golden
    Honeysuckle, Tatarian
    Olive, Autumn
    Privit, California
    Privit, Common
    Privit, Golden (Vicary)
    Viburnum, Nannyberry
    Wayfaring Tree
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height).
    Barberry, Truehedge
    Cherry, Nanking
    Dogwood, Coral
    Honeysuckle, Morrow
    Honeysuckle, Zabel
    Jetbead, Black
    Privit, Border
    Privit, Regel
    Sand Cherry, Purpleleaf
    Viburnum, Arrowwood
    Viburnum, Korean Spice
    Viburnum, Linden
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height).
    Barberry, Japanese
    Beautyberry, Japanese
    Cranberrybush, Dwarf American
    Honeysuckle, Clavey Dwarf
    Honeysuckle, Winter (Fragrant)
    Viburnum, Wrights’
  DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height).
    Chenault Coralberry
    Cotoneaster, Cranberry
  BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS
    Holly (female)
    Pyracantha
    Nandina




                    Low Maintenance _for your shrubs


                           HEIGHT AND SPREAD

Consider low maintenance when planning your landscape. When selecting
shrubs for your yard, determine the maximum height and spread you want
from the planting, and then select only from shrubs with those
characteristics.

The shrubs listed in this bulletin have been grouped according to their
mature heights. If you are looking for a shrub that will grow under a
window that is 4 feet from the ground, select from those listed as dwarf
shrubs. You certainly would not select a Tatarian Honeysuckle (10 to 12
feet) for this location.

Never select a shrub that will ultimately grow too high for its location
and expect to keep it shorter by constant clipping. This will only add
to your time in maintaining your landscape.

    [Illustration: _Wrong selection of shrubs can be disastrous as shown
    by the planting on the right._]


                         MAINTAINING SHRUB SIZE

Shrubs will require periodic pruning to maintain their proper shape and
size. Many shrubs will grow tall and spindly if not thinned-out
occasionally. Some shrubs will sucker severely at the ground if the
older stems or canes are not removed. This causes the shrub to spread
beyond its normal limits.

The proper method for maintaining shrub shape is to remove all canes
that are larger than one inch in diameter. These should be removed as
close to the ground line as possible. This practice will open the center
of the plant so that more light can penetrate into it. Also, the size of
the shrub will be maintained at the desirable height.

    [Illustration: _When removal of a cane has been decided upon, make
    the cut as close to the ground as possible (example A). When an old
    cane selected for removal has a desirable shoot at its base, make a
    cut as shown in example B. Note that the cut is slanted and is
    approximately ¼ inch above the shoot._]


                       ADAPTABILITY AND HARDINESS

Which plants are best suited for your landscape? This will depend on
whether the shrubs will be planted on a farmstead or in a city lot. It
will also depend on whether your yard is exposed to direct southwest
winds, or whether you have some protection.

Plant adaptability has been considered for each shrub listed in this
bulletin. You may plant any shrub that is listed as ‘Hardy’ in an open,
fully exposed location and expect it to survive. Those shrubs that have
an ‘X’ will most likely not survive if planted where they will receive
direct exposure to the hot winds of late summer. If you live in a town
or city, you may have enough wind protection to use these shrubs. This
is most important for homeowners living in the western counties of
Kansas.

Protection from southwest summer winds may be provided by a windbreak,
trees in the city, by planting on the east or north side of the house,
or behind a screen fence. If you have this protection you might be able
to use plants that are not listed for your area. However, if your yard
is exposed to hot summer winds, you had better use only the plant listed
for your section of Kansas.

You will sometimes find plants growing in your area that are not listed
for your particular section of Kansas. It is possible to grow some
plants outside their recommended region, provided these plants receive
adequate protection and care. These shrubs will usually not grow as
large or as tall as they would further south or east. If you are rather
certain that your yard will provide enough protection for these plants,
you might try growing a few.

    [Illustration: WINDS SHADE PROTECTION]


                       VARIETY LISTINGS OF SHRUBS

        Common Name              Botanical Name       Height Spread Adaptability
                                                                        [1]
            DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet in height or more)

 Cotoneaster, Peking       Cotoneaster acutifolia     10-12′ 8-10′  Hardy
 Cranberrybush, American   Viburnum trilobum          12′    10-12′ Hardy
 Cranberrybush, European   Viburnum opulus            8-12′  10-12′ Hardy
 Crapemyrtle               Lagerstroemia indica       10-12′ 5′     SE
 Dogwood, Gray             Cornus racemosa            8-12′  8-12′  Hardy
 Elder, Golden             Sambucus canadensis        12′    10-12′ Hardy
                             ′Aurea’
 Fringe Tree, Red          Cotonis coggygria          10′    10-12′ X, P
                             ′rubrifolia’
 Honeysuckle, Tatarian     Lonicera tatarica          10-12′ 8-10′  Hardy
 Hydrangea, P. G.          Hydrangea paniculata       10-15′ 10-15′ X, P
                             ′grandiflora’
 Lilac, Chinese            Syringa chinensis          10-15′ 10-15′ Hardy
   (Rothamagensis)
 Lilac, Common             Syringa vulgaris           12-15′ 12-15′ Hardy
 Lilac, Manchurian         Syringa amurensis          12-15′ 12-15′ Hardy
 Lilac, Peking             Syringa pekinensis         10-15′ 10-15′ Hardy
 Maple, Amur               Acer ginneis               15-20′ 10-12′ X, P
 Mockorange, Big Scentless Philadelphus grandiflorus  9-12′  5-8′   Hardy
 Olive, Autumn             Eleagnus umbellatus        14-16′ 15-17′ Hardy
 Pea Shrub                 Caragana arborescens       15-18′ 12-15′ Hardy
 Pearlbush                 Exochorda racemosa         10-15′ 10-15′ SC
 Plum, Flowering           Prunus triloba ′plena’     12′    10-12′ X
 Privit, Amur River North  Ligustrum amurense         10-12′ 5-7′   Hardy
 Privit, California        Ligustrum ovalifolium      10-12′ 6-8′   X, P
 Privit, Common            Ligustrum vulgare          10-12′ 6-8′   Hardy
 Privit, Golden (Vicary)   Ligustrum X vicari         12′    6-8′   X, P
 Redbud, Chinese           Cercis chinensis           10-12′ 10-12′ X, P
 Rose-of-Sharon (Althea)   Hibiscus syriacus          8-12′  6-10′  Hardy
 Smoke Tree (Purple        Cotinus coggygria          15′    8′     X, P
   Fringe)
 Snowball                  Viburnum opulus ′sterilis’ 8-12′  10-12′ Hardy
 Sumac, Smooth             Rhus giabra                10-12′ 12′    Hardy
 Sumac, Staghorn           Rhus typhina               20′    15-20′ Hardy
 Tamarisk, Common          Tamarix hispida            10-12′ 8-10′  Hardy
 Tamarisk, African         Tamarix africana           10-12  10′    SE
 Viburnum, Arrowwood       Viburnum dentatum          8-10′  10-12′ NC, P
 Viburnum, Nannyberry      Viburnum lentago           8-12′  10-12′ Hardy
 Viburnum, Siebold         Viburnum sieboldi          12-15′ 10-12′ NC
 Viburnum, Tea             Viburnum setigerum         10′    8-10′  NC
 Wahoo                     Euonymus atropurpureus     10-15′ 15-18′ Hardy
 Wayfaring Tree            Viburnum lantana           10-12′ 12′    NC
 Willow, Corkscrew         Salix matsudana ‘tortuosa’ 12-15′ 12′    X, P
 Willow, Pussy             Salix discolor             10-12′ 12′    X, P

        DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height)

 Barberry, Mentor          Berberis mentorensis       6-8′   5-7′   Hardy
 Barberry, Truehedge       Berberis thunbergi         6-8′   4-6′   X, P
                             ‘erecta’
 Bayberry, Northern        Myrica pennsylvanica       6-8′   4-6′   Hardy
 Beautybush                Kolkwitzia amabilis        7-10′  8-10′  Hardy
 Burning Bush, Winged      Euonymus alatus            8-10′  8-10′  X, P
 Butterfly Bush            Buddleia davidi            6-8′   6′     NC
 Cherry, Nanking           Prunus tomentosa ‘Orient’  9′     10-12′ Hardy
 Cotoneaster, Large        Cotoneaster multiflora     8′     8-12′  Hardy
   Flowering
 Crabapple, Sargent        Malus sargentii            6-8′   8-10′  Hardy
 Deutzia, Lemoine          Deutzia X lemoinei         5-7′   5-7′   NC, P
 Deutzia, ‘Pride of        Deutzia scabra             6-8′   4-6′   NC, P
   Rochester’
 Dogwood, Coral            Cornus alba ‘Siberica’     9′     8-10′  NC
 Dogwood, Redosier         Cornus stolonifera         8′     8-10′  X, P
 Dogwood, Silky            Cornus ammomum             8-10′  8-10′  X, P
 Dogwood, Yellowtwig       Cornus stolonifera         8′     8-10′  X, P
                             ‘flaviramea’
 Forsythia, Beatrix        Forsythia x intermedia     6-8′   6-8′   X, P
   Farrand
 Forsythia, Golden Bell    Forsythia viridissima      6-8′   5-6′   X, P
 Forsythia, ‘Karl Sax’     Forsythia X intermedia     6-8′   6-8′   X, P
 Forsythia, ‘Lynwood Gold’ Forsythia X intermedia     8-10′  8′     X, P
 Forsythia, ‘Showy Border’ Forsythia X intermedia     7-8′   6-8′   X, P
 Forsythia, ‘Siebold’      Forsythia suspensa         8-10′  10-15′ Hardy
                             ‘Sieboldii’
 Forsythia, ‘Spring Glory’ Forsythia X intermedia     7-8′   6-8′   X, P
 Holly, Winterberry        Ilex verticillata          6-8′   3-5′   NC, P
 Honeysuckle, Morrow       Lonicera morrowi           6-8′   8-10′  Hardy
 Honeysuckle, Zabel        Lonicera tatarica          7-10′  7-10′  Hardy
                             ‘Zabelii’
 Jetbead, Black            Rhodotypos scandens        5-7′   6-8′   NC, P
 Lilac, Late               Syringa villosa            8-10′  8-10′  Hardy
 Lilac, Persian            Syringa X persica          6-8′   7-9′   NC
 Magnolia, Star            Magnolia stellata          8-12′  10-12′ SC, P
 Mockorange, ‘Enchantment’ Philadelphus X lemoine     8′     6-8′   Hardy
 Mockorange, ‘Innocence’   Philadelphus X lemoine     8′     6-8′   Hardy
 Mockorange, ‘Minnesota    Philadelphus X virginalis  8′     6-8′   Hardy
   Snowflake’
 Mockorange, Sweet         Philadelphus coronarius    8-10′  6-7′   Hardy
 Ninebark, Common          Physocarpus opulifolius    7-9′   8-10′  Hardy
 Ninebark, ‘Goldleaf’      Physocarpus opulifolius    8-10′  8-10′  Hardy
                             ‘luteus’
 Privit, Border            Ligustrum obtusifolium     8-10′  9′     X, P
 Privit, Regel             Ligustrum obtusifolium     5-7′   6′     Hardy
                             ‘regelium’
 Sand Cherry, Purpleleaf   Prunus X cistena           7-9′   8-10′  Hardy
 Scotch Broom              Cytisus scoparius          6-8′   6-8′   SC
 Spirea, Bridalwreath      Spirea prunifolia ‘plena’  7-9′   8-10′  NC, P
 Spirea, Vanhoutte         Spirea X vanhouttei        6-8′   8-10′  Hardy
 Tamarisk, ‘Summer Glow’   Tamarix hispida            8′     10-12′ Hardy
 Viburnum, Doublefile      Viburnum plicatum          8-10′  8-10′  NC, P
                             ‘tomentosum’
 Viburnum, Korean Spice    Viburnum carlesii          6-8′   6-8′   Hardy
 Viburnum, Linden          Viburnum dilatatum         8-10′  8-12′  NC, P
 Weigela, Old Fashioned    Weigela florida            6-8′   8-10′  X, P

         DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height)

 Abelia, Glossy            Abelia X grandiflora       3-5′   3-5′   SC, P
 Almond, Flowering         Prunus glandulosa          4-5′   3-4′   Hardy
   (Cherry)
 Barberry, Japanese        Berberis thunbergii        4-6′   3-5′   X, P
   (Green)
 Barberry, Redleaf         Berberis thunbergii        4-5′   3-5′   X, P
                             ‘atropurpurea’
 Barberry, Kobold          Berberis thunbergii        4-6′   5-6′   X, P
                             ‘Kobold’
 Beautyberry, Japanese     Callicarpa japonica        4-5′   4-5′   NC, P
 Burning Bush, Dwarf       Euonymus alatus ‘compacta’ 4-5′   4-5′   X, P
   Winged
 Cotoneaster, Spreading    Cotoneaster divaricata     5-6′   6-8′   X, P
 Cranberry, Compact        Viburnum opulus            4-6′   4-6′   Hardy
   European                  ‘compactum’
 Honeysuckle, Clavey’s     Lonicera xylosteum         4-6′   4-6′   Hardy
   Dwarf
 Honeysuckle, Winter       Lonicera fragrantissima    5-7′   6′     Hardy
   (Fragrant)
 Hydrangea, A. G.          Hydrangea arborescens      3-5′   5-7′   NC, P
                             ‘grandiflora’
 Hydrangea, ‘Nikko Blue’   Hydrangea macrophylla      4-5′   5-6′   X, P
 Indian-current Coralberry Symphoricarpos orbiculatus 3-5′   4-5′   Hardy
 Kerria                    Kerria japonica            4-6′   5-7′   X, P
 Lilac, Dwarf Korean       Syringa oblata             4-6′   6-8′   NC, P
                             ‘palibiniana’
 Mockorange, ‘Albatre’     Philadelphus X virginalis  4-6′   4-6′   Hardy
 Mockorange, ‘Belle        Philadelphus X lemoine     6′     6′     Hardy
   Etoille’
 Mockorange, ‘Bouquet      Philadelphus X virginalis  6′     6′     Hardy
   Blanc’
 Mockorange, ‘Glacier’     Philadelphus X virginalis  4-6′   4-6′   Hardy
 Quince, Japanese          Chaenomeles lagenaria      5-7′   6-8′   X, P
   Flowering                 (speciosa)
 Snowberry                 Symphoricarpos albus       4-6′   4-6′   Hardy
 Spirea, Garland           Spirea X arguta            5-6′   5-6′   X, P
 Spirea, Thunberg          Spirea thunbergi           4-5′   4-5′   Hardy
 Viburnum, Wright’s        Viburnum wrighti ‘hessei’  3-5′   4-6′   X, P
 Weigela, ‘Bristol Ruby’   Weigela X florida          4-6′   4-6′   X, P
 Weigela, ‘Eva Rathke’     Weigela X floribunda       4-6′   6-8′   X, P
 Weigela, ‘Java Red’       Weigela purpurea           5-7′   6-8′   X, P

           DECIDUOUS SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height)

 Barberry, Crimson Pygmy   Berberis thunbergi ‘nana’  1½-2′  2-3′   X, P
 Chenauit Coralberry       Symphoricarpos X chenauiti 3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
 Cinquefoil                Potentilla fruticosa       2-4′   2-4′   Hardy
 Cotoneaster, Cranberry    Cotoneaster apiculata      2-3′   3-4′   X, P
 Deutzia, Rosepanicle      Deutzia X rosea ‘eximia’   3-4′   4-5′   NC
 Deutzia, Slender          Deutzia gracilis           2-3′   3-4′   NC
 Forsythia, ‘Bronx’        Forsythia viridissima      1½-2′  3′     X, P
                             ‘Bronxensis’
 Hydrangea, ‘Annabelle’    Hydrangea X arborescens    3-4′   4-5′   X, P
 Mockorange, Silver        Philadelphus X lemoine     3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
   Showers
 Mockorange, ‘Dwarf        Philadelphus X virginalis  2-3′   2-3′   Hardy
   Minnesota Snowflake’      ‘nana’
 Mockorange, Dwarf Sweet   Philadelphus coronarius    3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
                             ‘nana’
 Ninebark, Dwarf           Physocarpus opulitolius    3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
                             ‘nanus’
 Pea Shrub, Pygmy          Caragana arborescens       1½-2′  1½-2′  Hardy
 Quince, Dwarf Flowering   Chaenomeles meulei         2-3′   2-3′   X, P
 Quince, Japanese          Chaenomeles japonica       3-4′   4-5′   Hardy
   Flowering
 Quince, Red Japanese      Chaenomeles japonica       3-4′   4-5′   Hardy
                             ‘rubra’
 St. Johnswort, Hidcote    Hypericum patulum          1½-2′  1½-2′  X
                             ‘Hidcote’
 St. Johnswort, Kalm       Hypericum kalmianum        3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
 St. Johnswort, Sungold    Hypericum patulum          1½-2′  1½-2′  Hardy
                             ‘Sungold’
 Spirea, Anthony Waterer   Spirea X bumalda ‘Anthony  2-3′   2-3′   X, P
                             Waterer’
 Spirea, Froebel           Spirea X bumalda           3-4′   3-4′   X, P
                             ‘Froebeli’
 Spirea, Redflowering      Spirea japonica ‘coccinea’ 3-4′   3-4′   X, P
 Spirea, Snowmound         Spirea nipponica           3-4′   3-4′   Hardy
                             ‘Snowmound’
 Willow, Dwarf Arctic Blue Salix purpurea ‘nana’      3-4′   3-4′   NC

        Common Name              Botanical Name       Height Spread Adaptability
                                                                        [1]
       BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Tall (10 feet or more in height)

 Holly, American           Ilex opaca                 12-15′ 8-10′  SC, P
 Holly, Yaupon             Ilex vomitoria             10-15′ 8-10′  SC, P
 Magnolia, Southern        Magnolia grandiflora       15-20′ 10-12′ SC, P

   BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Medium (between 7 and 10 feet in height)

 Euonymus, Large-Leaf      Euonymus kiautschovicus    6-8′   8-10′  Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Euonymus, ‘Manhattan’     Euonymus kiautschovicus    8-10′  8-12′  Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Mahonia, Oregon Grape     Mahonia aquifolium         5-7′   4-5′   Hardy
 Pyracantha, ‘Kasan’       Pyracantha coccinea        6-8′   6-8′   X, P
                             ‘Kasan’
 Pyracantha, ‘Lalandii’    Pyracantha coccinea        5-10′  8-10′  X, P
                             ‘Lalandii’
 Pyracantha, ‘Wyatti’      Pyracantha coccinea        6-8′   6-8′   X, P
                             ‘Wyatti’
 Viburnum, Leatherleaf     Viburnum rhytidophylium    8-12′  8-12′  NC, P

    BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Small (between 4 and 6 feet in height)

 Barberry, Wintergreen     Berbaris juliana           4-6′   3-5′   NC, P
 Euonymus, Dupont          Euonymus kiautschovicus    5-6′   4-6′   Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Euonymus, ‘Emerald ’n’    Euonymus fortunei          4-5′   4′     X, P
   Gold’                     ‘vegetus’
 Euonymus, ‘Jewel’         Euonymus kiautschovicus    5-6′   4-6′   Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Euonymus, Medium Leaf     Euonymus kiautschovicus    5-6′   4-6′   Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Euonymus, ‘Sarcoxie’      Euonymus fortunei          4-5′   4′     X, P
                             ‘vegetus’
 Holly, Dwarf Japanese     Ilex crenata ‘compacta’    4-5′   4-5′   SC, P
 Holly, ‘Hellers’ Japanese Ilex crenata ‘Helleri’     4′     5′     SC, P
 Holly, Hetz Japanese      Ilex crenata ‘Hetzii’      4′     5′     SC, P
 Holly, Dwarf Yaupon       Ilex vomitoria ‘nana’      4′     5′     SC, P
 Nandina                   Nandina domestica          4-5′   4′     SC, P
 Pyracantha, ‘Low Boy’     Pyracantha coccinea ‘Low   4-5′   4-5′   X, P
                             Boy’

      BROADLEAF EVERGREEN SHRUBS: Dwarf (less than 4 feet in height)

 Azalea, Kurume            Rhododendron obtusum       3′     2-3′   SC, P
 Azalea, Mollis Hybrid     Rhododendron X kosterianum 3-4′   3-4′   SC, P
 Boxwood, Edging           Buxus sempervirens         2-3′   2-3′   NC, P
 Boxwood, Wintergreen      Buxus microphylus          4′     5′     NC, P
 Euonymus, ‘Emerald        Euonymus fortunei          3-4′   3-4′   X, P
   Cushion’                  ‘vegetus’
 Euonymus, ‘Emerald        Euonymus fortunei          3-4′   2-3′   X, P
   Gaiety’                   ‘vegetus’
 Euonymus, Small Leaf      Euonymus kiautschovicus    2-3′   2-3′   Hardy
                             (Patens)
 Euonymus, Vinca Leaf      Euonymus kiautschovicus    3-4′   3-4′   X, P
                             ‘vincafolia’
 Holly, Dwarf Burford      Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordi     3-4′   2-3′   Hardy
                             nana’
 Rhododendron              Rhododendron catawbiense   4′     4′     SC, P

  [1]Adaptability:
    SE—hardy in southeastern Kansas only;
    SC—hardy in south central and eastern Kansas;
    NC—hardy in central and eastern Kansas only;
    P—protect from south west winds;
    X—hardiness is doubtful in hotter, drier locations of Kansas;
    Hardy—fully hardy in exposed areas of Kansas.


                           PROBLEMS TO EXPECT

Every shrub species grown in Kansas can be expected to be afflicted with
some problem during its lifetime. The most common problems are insect
and disease attacks. These usually can be controlled by routine
spraying. Knowledge of the problems make it easier to diagnose and
correct before they become severe.

Soil alkalinity or high pH may also limit the use of some plants. Iron
chlorosis is a common problem with some shrubs grown in the western half
of Kansas. This is easily corrected by applying iron sulfate or iron
chelate to the plant or soil.

Your local County Extension Agent can assist you with the diagnosis of
any disease, insect, or cultural problem.

    [Illustration: MAN · PLANTS · ENVIRONMENT · HORTICULTURE]

 All Kansas Extension educational programs and materials are available
 to all individuals without discrimination on the basis of race, color,
                   national origin, sex, or religion.

   Cooperative Extension Service, Kansas State University, Manhattan
                         C-469    February 1973

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with U. S. Department of Agriculture.
Robert A. Bohannon, Director of Extension, Kansas State University of
Agriculture and Applied Science.

                          34-6672    2-73—20M
                      KANSAS STATE PRINTING PLANT




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Shrubs for Kansas Landscapes, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHRUBS FOR KANSAS LANDSCAPES ***

***** This file should be named 62234-0.txt or 62234-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/2/3/62234/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

